=== METADATA ===

Source: New York Times
Title: Russia’s War Forces Ukrainians From Their Homes in Historic Numbers
Authors: Megan Specia; Nick Cumming-Bruce; Matthew Mpoke Bigg
Reported_From: Ukraine
Published_Date: 2022-07-06
Updated_Date: 2025-05-24
Section: Russia-Ukraine War
Page: Not specified
Conflict: Russia-Ukraine War

=== ARTICLE ===

The plight of the displaced looms as one of Ukraine’s greatest challenges.

Food insecurity and hunger afflicted 2.3 billion people in 2021, and the war will add more, the U.N. says.

A top Russian official threatens the U.S. with the ‘wrath of God’ over war crime investigations.

Russian war bloggers see ‘a complete defeat’ for Ukraine in Luhansk, but some are skeptical.

President Biden calls Cherelle Griner to speak about her wife’s detention in Russia.

As Russia cuts gas shipments, Europe moves to bail out energy providers.

With the war constraining energy supplies, Europe embraces some gas and nuclear projects as ‘green.’

The U.S. intelligence chief laid out three scenarios in Ukraine. Here’s a look at each.

The plight of the displaced looms as one of Ukraine’s greatest challenges.

More than 6.27 million people are estimated to be displaced inside Ukraine, posing a challenge that will loom long after the war. Most are from the east, as Moscow’s forces train their artillery on Donetsk Province.

The plight of the displaced looms as one of Ukraine’s greatest challenges.
Food insecurity and hunger afflicted 2.3 billion people in 2021, and the war will add more, the U.N. says.
A top Russian official threatens the U.S. with the ‘wrath of God’ over war crime investigations.
Russian war bloggers see ‘a complete defeat’ for Ukraine in Luhansk, but some are skeptical.
President Biden calls Cherelle Griner to speak about her wife’s detention in Russia.
As Russia cuts gas shipments, Europe moves to bail out energy providers.
With the war constraining energy supplies, Europe embraces some gas and nuclear projects as ‘green.’
The U.S. intelligence chief laid out three scenarios in Ukraine. Here’s a look at each.
The plight of the displaced looms as one of Ukraine’s greatest challenges.


Families from Lysychansk, eastern Ukraine, evacuated in a van by volunteers last month.Credit...Tyler Hicks/The New York Times
An estimated third of Ukraine’s population has been forced from their homes since Russia invaded in February, including more than 6.27 million people who are displaced inside the country, according to International Organization for Migration data, illustrating the scale of a humanitarian crisis that has gone largely unseen as the war grinds on.

The number of internally displaced people dwarfs the 4.8 million Ukrainians who have fled into Europe as refugees, according to the United Nations refugee agency, which has described levels of displacement unseen since World War II.

While large swaths of the country were subject to the brutality of the Russian invasion in its early weeks, most of Ukraine’s displaced are now coming from the east, as that region becomes the center of the conflict.

Boarding trains and buses, civilians have poured out of cities and towns across eastern Ukraine, fleeing for the relative safety of the west and the northern capital, Kyiv. Some have left in humanitarian convoys, navigating treacherous roadways amid the threat of gunfire or shelling. Others have left on foot, literally running for their lives.  

And as Russian forces now train their artillery on Donetsk Province in the east, aiming to capture all of the industrial Donbas region, more people are being forced from their homes daily. Shellfire by Russian forces killed five civilians in Donetsk in the last 24 hours, the head of the regional military government, Pavlo Kyrylenko, said on Wednesday on the Telegram social messaging app.

For days, Mr. Kyrylenko has advised residents to leave the province, a sign that Ukrainian authorities believe the fighting will escalate. Officials hope to avoid having to attempt large-scale evacuations as in the neighboring province of Luhansk, which fell to the Russians in recent days.

Just three million people have officially been registered as internally displaced, although the true number is believed to be more than double that. A shortfall in international humanitarian support has further strained local resources.

“The state was not ready for such a scale of displaced persons in many areas,” Vitaly Muzychenko, the deputy minister of social policy for Ukraine, told a news conference this week, where he announced new plans to register displaced people for state benefits.

This mass displacement has reshaped communities across the country, even those that have been spared the physical devastation of the war. Shelters have sprung up in public buildings, university dorms have been converted and some modular homes have been set up to house the displaced.

The majority of internally displaced people, much like refugees, are women and children, and many face shortages of food, water and basic necessities, according to U.N. experts.

Oksana Zelinska, 40, who was the principal of a preschool in the southern city of Kherson, which is now occupied by Russian forces, fled in April with her two children, a co-worker and that woman’s children to the western city of Uzhhorod near the Slovakian border. Her husband has remained behind in Kherson, and she would like to return, but she said she stays in the west for her children.

“When we came here, I needed to do something, it was difficult and I didn’t want to sit around getting depressed,” she said. “I wanted to be useful.”

She began volunteering at the community kitchen that she had used when she first arrived, peeling potatoes and preparing food for the dozens who troop in daily for a hot meal.

Helping the displaced return to their homes — or find new ones — looms as one of Ukraine’s greatest challenges, whatever the outcome of the war. Some of their hometowns may not return to Ukrainian control. Others that are retaken could be almost entirely destroyed, with homes, water lines and other vital infrastructure pulverized by the Russian Army’s scorched-earth tactics.

Many of those who have fled Ukraine's east have started to fear they will never go back. Credit...Mauricio Lima and Maciek Nabrdalik for The New York Times, Erin Schaff/The New York Times
When she fled her city in eastern Ukraine, Hanna Obuzhevanna, 71, gave her keys to her neighbor so she could water the cyclamen plants on her balcony. They were in full bloom, and she thought she would be back in few weeks.

Three months later, she is still sleeping with her two sons in a room at an old church building near the city of Dnipro in central Ukraine, about 200 miles from home. A missile has wrecked her bedroom, her apartment was sacked, her city, Kreminna, is in Russian hands.

“I am sitting in someone else’s damp room. I am wearing someone else’s sweater, the crockery is not mine, I am sleeping on a bed that is not mine. Outside the window all is also foreign. I miss my home so much,” she said in a tearful voice message.

“But there is no way I will go back there if there are Russian occupiers.”

Ms. Obuzhevanna is among the three million people who have fled the Donbas region, about half of the prewar population, according to Ukrainian officials and international aid groups. In total, more than 10 million Ukrainians have been displaced.

When they left, many only packed up their documents and a handful of belongings, thinking they would be back soon. Now, five months into the war, many have started to fear they will never go back.

“I will never see anything from my house again,” said Vladislav Obuzhevannyi, Ms. Obuzhevanna’s son, the head of the budgeting department at a pharmaceutical company who lived in the city of Rubizhne, in eastern Ukraine, now in Russian hands. His office was destroyed by Russian artillery and he is haunted by memories of his breakfasts in his bright, warm apartment.

“I want to forget better so that the memories don’t hurt me,” he said.

Julia Kurilenko left Sloviansk, in eastern Ukraine, in 2014 during the pro-Russian insurgency and returned weeks later. She fled again when Russia invaded in February, assuming that she would stay in western Ukraine for a while, but would again be back soon.

Months later, as Russia has intensified its grip on the east, she has realized that will not be the case. “I promised my children that we would come back in one month,” she said, “Now, we realize that my promise was wrong.”

She applied for a sponsorship to bring all her family to Britain, which she reached just as Russia began to turn its focus to her region.

“We try to find a job,” she said, “and maybe stay for a long time.”

Elena Lisura, a Ukrainian refugee in Warsaw wants to return to Ukraine but cannot face the prospect of going home to the ruined southern city of Mariupol, now controlled by Russia and riddled with mass graves.

“I don’t want to breathe in the same air with the people who did that to my country,” she said.

Alina Lobzina contributed reporting.


Grain bins storing corn, wheat, sunflower and soybeans, in Boryspil, Ukraine, outside of the country’s capital, in May.Credit...Nicole Tung for The New York Times
Global hunger and the chronic inability to access food skyrocketed in 2021, with 2.3 billion people facing moderate or severe food insecurity around the world, the United Nations said in a report released Wednesday.

“The world is moving backward in its efforts to end hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition in all its forms,” the report said, in part as a result of the war in Ukraine, which is disrupting supply chains and contributing to the rising prices in energy, grain and fertilizers.

Ronald Tran Ba Huy, World Food Program’s deputy director for research assessment, said in a news briefing on Wednesday that prior to the pandemic, 135 million people faced acute food insecurity; before Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, that figure reached 276 million people. The estimated figure for 2022, he said, was 335 million people across 82 countries.

David Beasley, the World Food Program executive director, said at an event for the report’s release that the food crisis caused by the war in Ukraine would push countries into famine, resulting in “global destabilization, starvation and mass migration on an unprecedented scale.”

Russia and Ukraine produce about a third of the world’s supply of wheat and barley, and more than 50 percent of the global supply of sunflower oil. Russia is also a top exporter of fertilizers, oil and gas. The United Nations estimates that about 25 million metric tons of Ukrainian grain are currently trapped in silos because of Russian blockades of seaports in the Black Sea and attacks on railways in Ukraine.

The organization has been trying to broker a “double package” deal that would allow Ukrainian grain to be shipped out to market in exchange for facilitating Russia’s sales of fertilizer.

World leaders have discussed moving the grain by rail from Ukraine to neighboring countries, like Romania and Belarus, and then on to ships in their Black Sea ports, a time-consuming and logistically complicated process. In particular, securing the cooperation of Belarus, a strong ally of Russia, would be difficult.

So far no agreement has materialized.

But the chief economist of the United Nation’s Food and Agriculture Organization, Maximo Torero, told reporters on Wednesday that even if all of Ukraine’s grain was freed immediately, getting it to global markets would not resolve the crisis. Instead, he said, introducing the grains into the market could lead to sudden prices drops that would negatively affect farmers, who have to buy expensive fertilizers.

Mr. Torero said a better plan would be to carefully plan and create an emergency reserve.

The U.N. report, which was prepared by five U.N. agencies, recommended that governments overhaul agricultural policies and reallocate the $630 million that is collectively spent every year on food and agriculture to reduce the cost of nutritious food and make healthy diets more affordable and available.

Dmitri Medvedev, a leading Russian politician and close ally of President Vladimir V. Putin, at a meeting outside Moscow in January.Credit...Pool photo by Yulia Zyryaniva
One of Russia’s leading political figures on Wednesday rattled his country’s nuclear capabilities and threatened the United States with the “wrath of God” for pursuing war crimes investigations against Russia.

In a message posted to Telegram, the official, Dmitri Medvedev, said: “The idea of punishing a country that has one of the largest nuclear potentials is absurd. And potentially poses a threat to the existence of humanity.”

He also called the United States hypocritical for accusing Russia of war crimes, denouncing “all American history” as “a bloody war of annihilation.” He listed the subjugation of Native Americans and the dropping of nuclear bombs on Japan as examples.

“Who has answered for this crime?” Mr. Medvedev asked about the war in Vietnam. “What tribunal condemned the sea of blood spilled by the U.S. there and elsewhere?”

Russia has previously rejected evidence of atrocities committed by its troops in Ukraine, notably in the Kyiv suburb of Bucha. President Vladimir V. Putin, to whom Mr. Medvedev is closely allied, has blamed Russia’s invasion on provocations by the United States, NATO and “Nazis” in Ukraine.

Mr. Medvedev did not refer to any specific recent event as prompting his message. The prospect of trying Russian officials as war criminals has been raised by a number of countries and international organizations.

In March, President Biden and his secretary of state, Antony J. Blinken, both accused Mr. Putin of committing war crimes. Last month, during a visit to Ukraine, Attorney General Merrick B. Garland announced the formation of a “war crimes accountability team” focused on Ukraine.

“There is no hiding place for war criminals,” Mr. Garland said.

In May, the prosector of the International Criminal Court, Karim A.A. Khan, deployed what he described as the largest team of investigators and forensic experts in the history of his office. The European Union pledged millions of dollars to support the effort last month, but Russia, like the United States, is not a member of the court.

Russian officials and the leaders of liberal democracies, particularly the United States, have used increasingly vehement language to describe opposing worldviews during the war in Ukraine.

Mr. Medvedev embodies that condemnatory style. During his tenure as president of Russia from 2008 to 2012 — when Mr. Putin, blocked from the role by term limits, served as prime minister —  Mr. Medvedev met with human rights groups and oppositional journalists, establishing a reputation for holding liberal sympathies, even if hesitantly or only rhetorically.

Now, as vice chairman of Russia’s Security Council, he promotes fiery nationalism on his Telegram channel. The dehumanizing rhetoric of his latest message included a reference to Americans as “rotten dogs of war.”


A Russia-backed soldier placed a Soviet-era victory flag at a monument in Lysychansk on Monday.Credit...Alexander Ermochenko/Reuters
Pro-Russia war bloggers and commentators are celebrating the capture of Ukraine’s Luhansk region, with some seeing a sign that Russia’s momentum might accelerate. Others, however, are more skeptical, arguing that troops might be exhausted after weeks of intense fighting.

“The Ukrainian army has suffered a complete defeat,” commentator Yury Podolyaka declared on his Telegram channel, which has 2.2 million subscribers. In his daily video overview of the war, which he has claimed since the outset that Russia would win, he called for Russian forces to remain on the offensive after capturing the city of Lysychansk on Saturday.

“Today it is important to keep up the pace before the enemy has come to its senses, while it is still disheveled and hasn’t regrouped,” said Mr. Podolyaka, a native of Ukraine’s Sumy region. “We need to finish it up.”

Bloggers like Mr. Podolyaka have emerged as an influential group in Russia since the early days of the invasion in February, especially with independent reporting on the conflict in effect outlawed. Often using Telegram, a social messaging app, they have accumulated large numbers of subscribers with nationalistic but often critical commentary on the Russian war effort, especially in the early weeks, when its advances in Ukraine were stalled or repelled.

Igor Girkin, a retired Russian commander and one of the instigators of the separatist rebellion in eastern Ukraine in 2014, has criticized the Russian strategy in Luhansk in his posts.

The Russian troops, Mr. Girkin said, allowed most of the Ukrainian troops defending Lysychansk to escape. In other areas, the long battle for the Luhansk region gave the Ukrainians precious time to regroup and rearm in other areas, Mr. Girkin said. He also argued that Russia needs a larger army and must place its economy on a war footing in order to achieve its objectives in Ukraine.

“If we drag out general mobilization in Russia for longer, we can face a crisis in various areas of the Ukrainian front line,” he said, adding that Russian troops would not be able to fulfill the Kremlin’s objectives at their current levels.

Many pro-war bloggers agreed, however, that the Russian offensive in Ukraine must maintain ambitious goals. For Mr. Girkin, the only successful outcome would be if Russia captures most of Ukraine’s southeast and the government in Kyiv capitulates.

On Monday, President Vladimir V. Putin ordered that the troops involved in the Lysychansk offensive be given some rest to “increase their combat readiness,” while others should continue fighting. However, many bloggers said that the pause should not take too long, and that Russian forces should quickly train their sights on capturing the entire Donetsk, the province southwest of Luhansk.

“The main task today is to finish the enemy and advance toward Kramatorsk and Sloviansk,” Mr. Podolyaka said, referring to two key cities in Donetsk.

— Ivan Nechepurenko
President Biden calls Cherelle Griner to speak about her wife’s detention in Russia.
Image

While the W.N.B.A. star Brittney Griner’s trial is expected to reach a foregone conclusion, officials indicated she could appeal the sentence.Credit...Kirill Kudryavtsev/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
On Wednesday, President Biden and Vice President Kamala Harris spoke with Cherelle Griner, the wife of the W.N.B.A. star Brittney Griner, according to a statement released by the White House. Brittney Griner has been detained in Russia on drug charges since February.

During the call, Mr. Biden read a draft of a letter he planned to send to Brittney Griner.

“The president offered his support to Cherelle and Brittney’s family, and he committed to ensuring they are provided with all possible assistance while his administration pursues every avenue to bring Brittney home,” the statement read.

Brittney Griner has been detained in Russia since Feb. 17, accused by the Russian authorities of having a vape cartridge with hashish oil in her luggage at an airport near Moscow. Her trial began on Friday. On Monday, she sent a handwritten letter to Mr. Biden asking him not to “forget about” her and other American detainees.

The White House statement said Mr. Biden had instructed his national security team to keep in “regular contact” with Cherelle Griner and Brittney Griner’s family. Cherelle Griner has publicly expressed frustration with Mr. Biden and his administration’s efforts to secure her wife’s release.

In a statement to The New York Times on Wednesday, Cherelle Griner said she was grateful to Mr. Biden and Ms. Harris “for the time they spent with me and for the commitment they expressed to getting B.G. home.”

On Wednesday, Russia’s Foreign Ministry said that Brittney Griner could appeal her sentence or ask for clemency once the court delivers its verdict.

“The court must first deliver its verdict, but no one is stopping Brittney Griner from making use of the appeal procedure and also from requesting clemency,” Aleksei Zaitsev, a ministry spokesman, told reporters at a news briefing in Moscow.

Mr. Zaitsev said that Ms. Griner’s “serious offense has been supported by indisputable evidence” and that “attempts to present her case as though the American woman was illegally detained do not stand up to criticism.”

If she is convicted, Brittney Griner faces up to 10 years in a Russian penal colony.

The U.S. government has classified her as “wrongfully detained” and is working to secure her release regardless of the outcome of the trial.


Uniper, which runs this gas storage facility in Bavaria, could get financial relief from Germany’s Parliament on Thursday.Credit...Andreas Gebert/Reuters
BERLIN — Leaders in Europe, facing their worst energy crisis in decades, are taking extraordinary steps to secure supplies for winter amid fears of fuel shortages and near-record electricity and natural gas prices.

In Berlin, lawmakers prepared to approve legislation that would pave the way for Germany to bail out the country’s largest importer of Russian gas. In Paris, the prime minister announced her government’s intention to take full control of France’s state-backed electric utility provider.

There are mounting fears that skyrocketing energy costs, driven by steadily diminishing Russian gas shipments, will force energy companies into collapse — a spiral that Germany’s energy minister has likened to the way the fall of Lehman Brothers triggered the global financial crisis in 2008.

The disruption is being felt across the continent as countries including Austria, France and the Czech Republic try to find enough gas to fill their storage tanks before the temperatures drop — and, many fear, before Russia stops shipping gas altogether, possibly as soon as late July.

But it is felt most acutely in Germany, Europe’s largest economy, which for years has relied on Russia for most of its gas.

A measure that will be put to a vote in the German Parliament on Thursday is intended to allow the government to throw a lifeline to companies struggling with the record-high price of gas and cuts in supplies from Russia.

Élisabeth Borne, the French prime minister, told lawmakers on Wednesday for her first major speech before Parliament that the shift was needed to ensure France’s energy independence while also meeting a major goal of combating climate change.

Though France gets about 70 percent of its electricity from nuclear power, a bigger share than any other country in the world, Ms. Borne said it could also no longer count on Russian oil and gas.

— Melissa EddyStanley ReedConstant Méheut and Aurelien Breeden
With the war constraining energy supplies, Europe embraces some gas and nuclear projects as ‘green.’
Image

A nuclear power station in Dampierre-en-Burly, France. European officials argue that gas and nuclear power are important in helping the continent move away from more damaging energy sources.Credit...Benoit Tessier/Reuters
In a landmark vote for Europe’s climate and energy policies, the European Parliament on Wednesday endorsed labeling some gas and nuclear energy projects “green,” allowing them access to hundreds of billions of euros in cheap loans and even state subsidies.

The decision placed the European Union’s heavy thumb on the scale of a global debate about how and how quickly major industrialized economies can move from their heavy reliance on fossil fuels — and it immediately proved controversial, prompting boos from opponents inside and outside the parliamentary building in Strasbourg, France.

Critics said it would lock in and prolong Europe’s reliance on fossil fuels, while the measure’s proponents, including in the European Commission, the E.U. executive arm that drafted it, said it was part of a pragmatic approach to the transition to renewable energy, especially as Europe seeks to wean itself off Russian fuel imports in the wake of the invasion of Ukraine.

The measure had been in the works even before Russia’s tanks crossed the border, but it gained urgency as the European Union responded to the invasion by banning Russian energy sources, including most coal and oil. Left untouched has been Russian gas, on which Europe remains heavily dependent.

The Russian invasion presented European countries with an urgent choice: to get gas from anywhere other than Russia, or double down on renewable sources like wind and solar.

Wednesday’s vote signaled Europe’s intention to prolong its reliance on gas — the principal component of which is methane, which speeds up global warming.

The choice could undermine a competing European imperative to cut its greenhouse gas emissions by more than half by 2030. E3G, an energy research group, said it was “at odds with the overall direction the E.U. is taking.”

The amendment the Parliament backed on Wednesday was part of a broader E.U. effort to give banks and other organizations tools to evaluate which projects deserve loans and funds on the basis of being environmentally friendly.



Kateryna Verhonos, 69, inspecting her house that was damaged by shelling in March, in Moschun, Ukraine, on Tuesday.Credit...Emile Ducke for The New York Times
Avril Haines, the U.S. director of national intelligence, recently outlined three plausible scenarios in Ukraine.

In the first, Russia’s continuing progress in eastern Ukraine would break Ukrainians’ will to fight and allow the Russian military to take over even more of the country. This outcome is President Vladimir V. Putin’s new goal after being defeated in his initial attempt to oust Ukraine’s government.

In the second scenario — the most likely one, Haines said during a public appearance in Washington last week — Russia would dominate the east but would not be able to go much farther. The two countries would fall into a stalemate that Haines described as “a grinding struggle.”

In the third scenario, Ukraine would halt Russia’s advance in the east and also succeed in launching counterattacks. Ukraine has already regained some territory, especially in the southern part of the country, and some military experts expect a broader offensive soon.

The Morning newsletter provides an update on the war by examining a few questions that will help determine which of these three scenarios becomes most likely.


DONETSK REGION, Ukraine — Between the cracks of mortar fire and the metallic bangs of Russian self-detonating mines, Yurii, a Ukrainian Army medic, readied an intravenous line for the soldier sprawled on the stretcher below him.

The soldier looked to be in his mid-20s. His face was smeared with dirt and fear.

“Do you remember your name?” Yurii asked.

“Maksym,” the soldier whispered back.

Earlier that morning Maksym had been under a Russian bombardment at the front in eastern Ukraine that had left him severely concussed. Yurii and other Ukrainian medics were tending to him at an aid station barely removed from what has come to be known as the ‘zero line,’ where the shelling is relentless.

Daily afternoon thunderstorms had soaked the country roads and wheat fields of Donbas, a swath of rolling fields and coal mining towns that has been the focus of Russia’s military campaign in Ukraine. The sheets of rain turned the bottom of Russian and Ukrainian trenches there into slick mud.

Maybe that is why Maksym was above ground Wednesday morning, having decided to dry out after a damp night.

It is not clear what transpired in the minutes before Maksym was wounded. He was still in shock when his comrades hoisted him out of a pickup truck and handed him to Yurii’s medical crew and the waiting olive drab van-turned-ambulance several minutes later.

“You’re safe,” said Yurii, a former anesthesiologist who was once the deputy head of a children’s hospital in Kyiv, the capital, before Russia invaded. He gave only his first name for security reasons.

Maksym mumbled unintelligibly.

“You’re safe,” said Sasha, another medic who had tough hands and a background in massage therapy.

Maksym and his caretakers were certainly not safe.


Stanislav Drokin allowed his jewelry atelier in Kharkiv, Ukraine, to serve as a wartime storage space for food and medicine.Credit...via Stanislav Drokin
In May, during a brief respite from the Russian rockets that had been hitting Kharkiv, Ukraine, Stanislav Drokin walked out of his jewelry atelier in his hometown’s city center to collect bomb fragments.

Mr. Drokin has lived in the atelier since Feb. 24, the day Russia invaded Ukraine. He moved there with his wife, Ludmila, along with two families of friends because it was too dangerous to remain at their home in Saltivka, a neighborhood in Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second-largest city.

Within a few weeks, however, everyone fled except for Mr. Drokin, who is 53 and, like all Ukrainian men from ages 18 to 60, is prohibited from leaving the country. (Ludmila joined the couple’s daughter, Alina, in Berlin, while the other families dispersed across Ukraine.)

For the first two months Mr. Drokin dedicated all his time to volunteering in the war effort. He allowed the atelier, which serves as both a production facility and showroom, to take on a third, de facto role: storage space for medicine and food.

Sorting and taking inventory of the supplies occupied most of his time. By mid-May, however, when the volunteer movement became more organized, Mr. Drokin was able to resume his jewelry practice.

Many members of the Ukrainian jewelry community — those who remain in the country and those in refuge abroad — said the war had motivated them to support Ukraine’s jewelry industry like never before.
