=== METADATA ===

Source: New York Times
Title: Republicans Fight With Trump’s Team Over Ukraine Talks
Authors: Megan Mineiro
Reported_From: Washington
Published_Date: 2025-11-25
Print_Version_Date: 2025-11-26
Section: A
Page: 6
Conflict: Russia-Ukraine War

=== ARTICLE ===

Republicans Fight With Trump’s Team Over Ukraine Talks

Senator Mitch McConnell and several other lawmakers have accused President Trump’s team of appeasing the Kremlin, warning that doing so would not lead to lasting peace.

Congressional Republicans who view Ukraine as a bulwark against Russian aggression are openly blasting President Trump’s team for an approach they argue amounts to appeasing the Kremlin in a bid to swiftly draw the conflict to a close.

Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky feuded on social media on Tuesday with Vice President JD Vance, a key player in the ongoing talks, scolding him in a series of posts for defending an emerging deal that Mr. McConnell argued would not secure Ukraine and would play into Russia’s hands.

“A deal that rewards aggression wouldn’t be worth the paper it’s written on,” Mr. McConnell, the longest-serving Senate Republican leader and one of his party’s most vocal proponents of American support for Kyiv, wrote in conclusion. “America isn’t a neutral arbiter, and we shouldn’t act like one.”

The diatribe came in response to a long post from Mr. Vance in which he accused Mr. McConnell of making a “ridiculous attack” on the peace plan on Friday, when the Kentucky Republican had written that President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia had “spent the entire year trying to play President Trump for a fool,” and added that if Mr. Trump’s top negotiators were “more concerned with appeasing Putin than securing real peace, then the President ought to find new advisers.”

The bitter exchange reflected deep divisions among Republicans about the direction of the negotiations, and the Trump administration’s handling of them. It also reflected a broader dispute within the party between hawkish traditionalists and those who espouse an “America First” posture of disentangling the United States from foreign intervention.

The White House has insisted that the peace plan being discussed was developed by Jared Kushner, Mr. Trump’s son-in-law, and the White House envoy Steve Witkoff, who met on several occasions with Russian officials before releasing the proposal last week.

But several G.OP. lawmakers were alarmed when Secretary of State Marco Rubio told senators over the weekend that it was a Russia-led proposal, before backpedaling and saying it was a U.S. document.

And several Republicans have condemned the plan that served as the basis for talks in Geneva over the weekend, saying it did not properly take into account Ukrainian demands and made concessions to Russia that Kyiv would not accept. Chief among them were proposals that Ukraine reduce its military forces and cede territory to Russia.

“We hate appeasing Putin’s Russia & throwing Ukraine, who wants freedom and independence, under Putin’s bus,” Representative Don Bacon, Republican of Nebraska, wrote on social media. “The Thursday 28-point surrender plan was disgusting.”

Representative Brian Fitzpatrick, Republican of Pennsylvania and a co-chair of the Congressional Ukraine Caucus, described the plan as “Russia’s absurd wish list,” and called for it to be “shredded for the garbage that it is.”

“The only peace plan that should be taken seriously is one that is 100% drafted by and approved by Ukraine,” Mr. Fitzpatrick added in a post on social media. “They are the victims here, and we will stand behind them 100%.”

Senator Lindsey Graham, the South Carolina Republican who is both a leading hawk and a loyal ally of Mr. Trump, praised the president’s effort to end the war.

“However,” he added in a post on social media, “it is clear to me that there will be no peace as long as Putin believes he is in the driver’s seat. He will insist on capitulation, not peace.”
