=== METADATA ===
Source: New York Times
Section: International / Israel-Hamas War
Title: Optimism on Trump’s Gaza Plan, but No Guarantees. Here’s What to Know.
Authors: Aaron Boxerman
Reported from: Jerusalem
Published_Date: Oct. 4, 2025
Updated_Date: Oct. 6, 2025
Language: English

=== ARTICLE ===
Optimism on Trump’s Gaza Plan, but No Guarantees. Here’s What to Know.

Israel and Hamas said they will work with President Trump’s proposal to end the Gaza war. But persistent sticking points could derail a diplomatic breakthrough.

Israeli and Hamas representatives were expected to start negotiations in Egypt on Monday in the most serious diplomatic push for a Gaza truce in recent months, as President Trump sought to advance his ambitious vision for the territory.

The two sides, who refuse to speak directly, will rely on Qatari, Egyptian and American mediators to ferry messages back and forth in an attempt to bridge significant gaps.

U.S. officials have expressed optimism that part of Mr. Trump’s plan could be achieved quickly: a Hamas release of hostages held in Gaza in exchange for Palestinians imprisoned by Israel and an Israeli withdrawal from parts of Gaza.

But even with Mr. Trump pressuring both sides to reach a deal quickly, analysts cautioned that persistent sticking points could sink the chances for a diplomatic breakthrough.

Tuesday marks two years since the war began, ignited by the Hamas-led Oct. 7, 2023, attack on Israel. The two sides have been negotiating for most of the past two years without reaching an agreement to end the war.

Israelis and Palestinians are experiencing a mix of emotions, from hope to disbelief to anxiety, over the developments of the past week, which could end the war — or lead to another disappointing dead end.

What does the Trump plan envision?

After months of deadlock, Mr. Trump presented a sweeping plan last week to end the fighting and free the remaining hostages. At least 20 living hostages and the bodies of about 25 others are believed to still be in Gaza.

Israel’s campaign in Gaza has killed more than 65,000 people, including thousands of children, according to local health officials. The Hamas-led attack on Israel that started the war killed roughly 1,200 people, and about 250 were taken hostage.

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel has said he backs Mr. Trump’s plan. On Friday, after Mr. Trump leveled an ultimatum to Hamas to agree to the deal, the Palestinian militant group announced that it was prepared to release all of the hostages under the terms of the plan.

But Hamas’s response was vague on many of Mr. Trump’s other demands. Mr. Trump’s proposal would see Hamas lay down its weapons, for example, which Hamas’s statement did not address.

Mr. Trump said Hamas’s answer showed it was “ready for a lasting PEACE” and exhorted Israel to immediately stop bombing Gaza to allow the deal to advance. Israel ordered its troops in Gaza to focus on defensive rather than offensive operations, according to Israeli officials.

The negotiations in Egypt will focus on the first part of Mr. Trump’s plan: freeing remaining hostages in exchange for Israel’s release of Palestinian prisoners and withdrawal from parts of Gaza.

In Mr. Trump’s proposal, the hostages would be exchanged for 250 Palestinian prisoners serving life sentences for militant activity and 1,700 Gazans detained during the war. Each dead Israeli captive would be exchanged for the bodies of 15 Gazans.

Israeli forces will also withdraw to an agreed-upon line, but still be inside Gaza’s borders.

Mr. Netanyahu has repeatedly insisted that Israel will not accept any agreement in which Hamas refuses to surrender its arms. “This will happen either diplomatically, according to Trump’s plan, or militarily — at our hands,” he said on Saturday, adding, “This will be achieved the easy way or the hard way, but it will be achieved.”

What are the biggest sticking points?

Mr. Trump’s proposal, which will form the basis for the talks in Egypt, can broadly be divided into two parts: the hostage release deal and the vision for postwar Gaza. Both are full of potential stumbling blocks that could torpedo a deal.

One major issue will be how far Israeli forces withdraw during the initial phase, when Hamas is to hand over the hostages. Another issue will be how long Hamas has to gather the hostages and the bodies of the dead. Under Mr. Trump’s plan, it would return them all within 72 hours of the cease-fire.

Israeli and Hamas officials have both said that deadline could be unrealistic and the group needs more time, particularly to find and dig up hostages who were killed.

The two sides will likely disagree over which Palestinian prisoners would be released. Hamas could demand that Israel place senior Palestinian leaders, such as Marwan Barghouti, on the list, but Israel would be reluctant to accept.

Even if Israel and Hamas work out the details of the exchange, it is unclear whether Hamas is willing to accept many of Mr. Trump’s postwar conditions.

Under the American plan, Hamas would have to disarm, which it has refused to do in the past. The proposal calls for an international security force, which Hamas officials have rejected as foreign meddling in Palestinian affairs.

If Hamas freed the hostages before working out those details, the group would be giving up what it views as its main leverage with Israel.

Efforts to halt the fighting in Gaza have previously ended in frustration. Israel and Hamas have agreed only to temporary cease-fires before: for about a week in November 2023 and for less than three months earlier this year.

Who will be negotiating in Egypt?

The negotiations in Egypt are planned in Sharm al-Sheikh, a tourist resort on the Red Sea. They will likely involve representatives of Israel, Hamas, Egypt, Qatar, and the United States.

Israel’s delegation includes representatives from Mr. Netanyahu’s inner circle, as well as military and intelligence officials. The team is led by Ron Dermer, one of the prime minister’s closest advisers. It was not immediately clear when he would join the talks in Egypt.

Hamas said its negotiators arrived in Egypt on Sunday night, led by Khalil al-Hayya, one of the group’s leaders. Mr. al-Hayya was one of the Hamas officials who was targeted in the Israeli bombing of Doha, Qatar, last month, but he survived. His son and an aide were killed.

Steve Witkoff, President Trump’s envoy to the Middle East, and Jared Kushner, Mr. Trump’s son-in-law, were also expected to head to the talks.