=== METADATA ===
Source: New York Times
Title: Israeli Forces Kill Two Palestinians After They Appear to Surrender, Video Shows
Authors: Adam Rasgon, Sanjana Varghese, Fatima AbdulKarim
Reported_From: Tel Aviv, Ramallah (West Bank)
Published_Date: 2025-11-28
Print_Version_Date: 2025-11-29
Section: A
Page: 9
Conflict: Israel-Hamas War

=== ARTICLE ===

Israeli Forces Kill Two Palestinians After They Appear to Surrender, Video Shows

The Israeli authorities said they were investigating the shooting, which came amid days of extensive military operations in the West Bank.

Israeli security forces on Thursday killed two militants in the West Bank after they appeared to surrender, according to videos released by an international news agency and two Arab television networks.

Israeli security forces shot dead two Palestinians in the West Bank on Thursday after they appeared to surrender, according to videos released by an international news agency and two Arab television networks.

The Israeli authorities said in a statement that they were examining the shooting and that the two men were involved in militant activity. Palestinian officials condemned the killings as a “field execution.”

The shooting came amid days of extensive Israeli military operations and raids in the Israeli-occupied northern West Bank. It prompted fresh accusations from Palestinian officials that Israel was using excessive force there.

Footage showed two men emerging from a garage in Jenin, who then lift their shirts, seeming to indicate they are carrying no weapons, and raise their hands. They are seen kneeling, while Israeli security forces point their weapons at them.

The Israeli forces kick the men, who shuffle back toward the garage. Moments later, gunshots are fired and, shortly after, the body of one of the men can be seen slumped on the ground. In one of the clips reviewed, Israeli forces can be seen continuing to shoot into the garage.

Palestinian authorities in the West Bank said the two men were killed and identified them as Al-Muntasir Billah Abdullah, 26, and Yousef Asasa, 37.

Islamic Jihad, a Palestinian militant group, said Mr. Abdullah and Mr. Asasa were members of its military wing.

Ahmad Nazzal, a reporter for Palestine TV, one of the channels that shared the footage, said he was at the scene and watched the shooting unfold. He said in an interview that Israeli forces were operating in the area for hours before the shooting.

The channel is run by the Palestinian Authority, which administers parts of the West Bank.

In a joint statement, the Israeli military and police acknowledged that the Palestinians had been shot at, saying “fire was directed toward the suspects.” They said the shooting was being reviewed by commanders on the ground and transferred to the “relevant professional bodies.”

The statement also said that the two Palestinians had previously been involved in militant activity, including throwing explosives at security forces and opening fire on them.

Eitan Ilan, a spokesman for the Department of Investigations of Police Misconduct, an arm of Israel’s justice ministry, said his office was investigating the shooting.

Israel’s far right national security minister, Itamar Ben-Gvir, offered his support for the security forces. “The fighters acted exactly as is expected from them — terrorists need to die!” he wrote on X.

On Thursday, Volker Türk, the United Nations human rights chief, expressed outrage at the “apparent summary execution” of the two Palestinians.

The foreign ministry of the Palestinian Authority condemned the killing as an “ugly field execution” and called on the international community to act.

“The ministry sees this crime as directly extending from an official, systematic, and widespread Israeli policy based on intentionally killing Palestinians outside the framework of the law,” the ministry said.

Husam Zomlot, the Palestinian ambassador to the United Kingdom, said the killings were “part of a pattern across the occupied territory.”

B’Tselem, an Israeli human rights group, said the shootings were the result of “an accelerated process of dehumanization of Palestinians and the complete abandonment of their lives” by Israel.

Since January 2025, the Israeli military has taken control of parts of Jenin in an operation that officials have described as a crackdown on militancy. Palestinian rights groups say that has led to the killing of civilians, the destruction of homes and the displacement of thousands.

The military intensified operations in a number of towns near Jenin in recent days, detaining and questioning dozens of people. Palestinians have reported Israeli security forces destroying roads and taking over homes.

