=== METADATA ===

Source: New York Times
Title: One Year of Reporting on the War in Ukraine
Authors: Not specified
Reported_From: Ukraine
Published_Date: 2023 (summary of 2022 coverage)
Updated_Date: 2025-05-24
Section: Russia-Ukraine War
Page: Not specified
Conflict: Russia-Ukraine War

=== ARTICLE ===

Since before Russia began its invasion on February 24, 2022, New York Times journalists and photographers have been on the ground in Ukraine. Over the course of the year, more than 100 New York Times reporters, photographers, producers, videographers, security and staff have been on rotation in Ukraine, with more than 1,000 across our newsrooms and bureaus worldwide contributing to our coverage of the sprawling, international impact of this conflict.

Over the course of the year, these reporters have helped readers understand the conflict through 24/7 live briefings updated by newsrooms in Europe, Asia and the United States, expert data analysis, groundbreaking investigations, revealing audio, and unflinching video and photography which captured some of the most recognizable images of the conflict.

1000+
reporters, producers and editors worldwide
850+
journalists worldwide
100+
journalists and staff on rotation in Ukraine
400
live briefings or blogs
44
episodes of The Daily
570+
push alerts

Groundbreaking international and on-the-ground journalism

Our journalists have reported countrywide, from Lviv in the west to Donbas in the east, and from Kyiv in the north to Odesa in the south. We’re one of the few media outlets to have reported from Chernobyl, Bakhmut, Mykolaiv, and the city of Sievierodonetsk as it was falling.

These journalists have produced innovative and rigorous coverage across a broad range of storytelling mediums, from providing listeners with eyewitness accounts on The Daily and exposing Russian atrocities in monthslong investigations, to tracking the Russian invasion and mapping out the next critical stage in Ukraine, and recording the human and emotional toll of the war from the front lines of the conflict.

This month, a number of journalists across the newsroom won the Polk Award for foreign reporting, with the judges drawing attention to “Putin’s War,” a 13,000-word, two-month investigation that exposed Russia’s military as unprepared, ill-equipped and badly managed, and “The Making of Vladimir Putin,” in which Paris bureau chief Roger Cohen traced the Russian president’s 22-year slide from statesman to tyrant.

Almost every desk at The New York Times has contributed to our reporting on the global impact of the war – on immigration, food shortages, sanctions, supply chains, natural resources, culture, our global economy and geopolitics.

Unearthing evidence of possible war crimes

Since January 2022, our Visual Investigations team has published nearly two dozen stories on the impact of the Russian invasion. Leading this team on-the-ground has been video journalists Yousur Al-Hlou and Masha Froliak. They arrived in Ukraine before the Russian invasion, filming and reporting for five months from multiple hotspots. They chronicled the human impact of the war on Ukrainian civilians and soldiers, while also gathering and verifying evidence that has opened up new investigations and avenues of reporting for journalists covering the war.

When Russian forces retreated from  the Ukrainian town of Bucha in early April, Yousur and Masha were among the first on the scene. They began an eight-month reporting effort to collect documentary evidence in Bucha. Over the course of the investigation, they and the team obtained and analyzed: over 23 terabytes of security camera, witness and drone footage; more than 4,000 audio recordings from intercepted phone calls; thousands of photographs; and hundreds of military documents. They were able to identify – for the first time – the specific Russian military unit and commander responsible for potential crimes against humanity in Bucha. They also reported on the final moments of 36 victims who were killed along Yablunska Street.

Our Visual Investigations team also published multiple interactive investigations around their reporting in Bucha: uncovering exclusive footage that revealed how a group of Ukrainian men were marched to their death; obtaining exclusive audio from intercepted phone calls by Russian soldiers that revealed an army in disarray; and uncovering documents and intercepts that showed how President Putin’s war in Ukraine became a catastrophe for Russia.

Bearing witness through unflinching photography

Over the course of the year, our photographers have documented almost every aspect of the conflict: subway shelters and deserted villages; drone bases and mass graves; missile paths and refugee routes; apartment buildings on fire and soldiers under fire. In today’s report, 14 photographers who have worked in Ukraine for The Times each shared their thoughts on the moments in time that expose the reality of the conflict for Ukraine’s citizens, from providing a view into how children bear the burden of war to witnessing the relentless determination of Ukraine’s volunteer troops.

Lynsey Addario, a photographer on assignment for The New York Times, has spent several months in Ukraine, documenting the war. This month, Lynsey won the Polk photojournalism award for a photo that captured the horror in Ukraine. In the photo, the bodies of a Ukrainian mother, her two children and a family friend lay on the ground after they were killed by Russian mortar fire while trying to flee Ukraine. The citation for the award noted that Lynsey “dove for cover as the shell landed and then took the gruesome photo on instinct.”

Our coverage is reaching a global audience

Our coverage of the Russia-Ukraine war was our biggest storyline for international readers in 2022. We’ve amplified our reporting of this critical story to reach audiences where they are: on social media platforms, through newsletter briefings and unrelenting live coverage.

Our live coverage of the conflict tells readers around the globe about the most important developments as they unfold. Since February 2022, The Times has published more than 400 live briefings or blogs on the war.

This real-time coverage began in January 2022, weeks before Russia’s invasion. Since mid-February, it has run almost every day with Times newsrooms in Seoul, London and New York handing off editing responsibilities to one another around the clock.

Almost 500 journalists on six continents have fed our live coverage, filing updates from locations including Moscow, London, New York, Berlin, Seoul, Tbilisi, Istanbul, Beijing, Washington, Nairobi, New Delhi, Brussels, and Rio de Janeiro.

On Tuesday, Feb. 22, 2022, two days before Russian troops invaded Ukraine, we launched the Russia-Ukraine War Briefing. This newsletter has allowed us to reach hundreds of thousands of readers with regular updates from inside Ukraine and analysis of the conflict’s international impact.

We have also helped readers follow updates on the war through our Telegram channel, which delivers our essential reporting on the war. About a quarter of our Telegram subscribers have their language set to Russian, making this the second-largest segment of followers after English-language.

Our commitment to this coverage continues

Our commitment to covering the war in Ukraine and its global impact continues and we’re directing significant resources to cover the conflict for the long-term. In 2022, The New York Times set up a Ukraine bureau with Andrew Kramer as its Kyiv bureau chief, and as the war intensified, we appointed a correspondent specializing in weapons, military readiness and supply lines.

Our reporters, photographers, producers, and support teams on the ground have harnessed personal courage and deep journalistic experience to help readers around the world understand the significance of the war, bearing witness to atrocities and holding perpetrators to account through the independent, unflinching and factual reporting of The New York Times.

