=== METADATA ===
Source: The New York Times
Section: International / Middle East
Title: Israeli-Backed Gaza Aid Outfit Shunned by Humanitarian Groups Shuts Down
Authors: Ephrat Livni
Published: Nov. 24, 2025
Updated: Dec. 1, 2025

=== ARTICLE ===

Israeli-Backed Gaza Aid Outfit Shunned by Humanitarian Groups Shuts Down

The Gaza Humanitarian Foundation said it had succeeded in delivering million of meals in the war-torn enclave, but some Palestinians were killed trying to obtain them.

An aid group in the Gaza Strip that was backed by Israel and the United States and run by American contractors said it was shutting down on Monday after a monthslong run that generated international outcry over an approach that critics said ignored humanitarian norms and endangered Palestinians seeking food.

The shuttering of the Gaza Humanitarian Foundation comes amid a fragile cease-fire between Israel and Hamas that began last month and is allowing more aid into the war-torn enclave after an Israeli blockade that exacerbated widespread privation.

A distribution system run by the United Nations, which the foundation had mostly, if briefly, replaced, has resumed many operations that paused during the blockade. That left the group without its original purpose, among other challenges.

The organization’s chief, John Acree, said in a statement on Monday that the foundation, known as the G.H.F., had a single mission — to “feed civilians in desperate need” — and that it had “successfully” met this goal by delivering millions of meals in Gaza over about four and a half months.

That rosy assessment was at odds with the conclusions of the organization’s critics and even of some who supported the project, which was highly contentious from the start.

The G.H.F. project was fraught even before it began operating in Gaza in May.  The foundation was conceived by Israelis and supported by the United States. It was intended to replace a much more expansive United Nations-backed aid system after Israel accused the armed Palestinian group Hamas of systematically looting those supplies. That claim was disputed by some Israeli military officials.

Some humanitarian groups argued that the G.H.F.’s aid model militarized assistance for civilians in violation of international law. And the sparsity of its locations, they noted, meant that Palestinians seeking food often had to travel long distances to crowded sites and were exposed to numerous dangers en route.

There were only four G.H.F. locations, and the routes to those sites drew Palestinians into the line of Israeli fire. Israeli soldiers were positioned near the sites and along the way to them.

Hundreds of Palestinians were killed seeking aid, according to the Gaza health ministry, whose leadership is appointed by Hamas. The Israeli military said its soldiers had fired to control crowds and quell immediate threats, and disputed the ministry’s death toll.

The G.H.F. repeatedly denied that people were killed at its sites. Still, there is little question that some aid seekers were killed as they tried to get food from the group.

In July, the foundation said that 20 people had been killed in a stampede near a site after what it said were armed agitators prompted a “chaotic and dangerous surge.” It blamed Hamas for the violence.

Over the summer, as criticism and casualties mounted, the foundation issued almost daily calls for other humanitarian groups to join its efforts, but was repeatedly rebuffed. U.N. experts in August called for the foundation to be dismantled, saying its ties to Israel violated the fundamental principles of humanitarian assistance, including independence and neutrality.

The announcement that G.H.F. was permanently shutting down was not unexpected. Last month, the group said it was suspending operations as the cease-fire took hold.

The truce created logistical problems for the organization. Three of its four sites were in Israeli-occupied territory to which Palestinians could no longer gain access.

The G.H.F. was also low on cash. The United States pledged $30 million in June, and an undisclosed donor country gave it $100 million (Israel has denied funding the group), but efforts to raise more money failed as the group drew widespread criticism.

Benjamin Netanyahu, Israel’s prime minister, had backed the G.H.F. as a replacement for the U.N. distribution network, but he told Fox News in an interview in September that the new endeavor “unfortunately did not work.” He blamed Hamas.

In announcing its shutdown, the foundation pushed back against criticism and appeared to shift the blame for falling short of its original stated goal to feed people across the enclave. It said it had been unable to open more locations because of “a lack of aid and access.”

The group lamented “legacy aid organizations” that declined to collaborate with it and said its original plan “was never permitted to be fully implemented.”

Stéphane Dujarric, the U.N. spokesman, declined to comment  other than to say that there had been “no collaboration” with the G.H.F. and so its closings would have no effect on U.N. operations.

For its part, the G.H.F. did not rule out the possibility that it could be called upon once again. The foundation said it was not going to dissolve and “will maintain readiness to reconstitute if new humanitarian needs are identified.”




