=== METADATA ===
Source: The New York Times
Section: Israel-Gaza Conflict
Title: Hamas Returns the Body of a Hostage, One of the Last in Gaza
Authors: Aaron Boxerman
Published: Nov. 25, 2025
Updated: Dec. 8, 2025

=== ARTICLE ===
Hamas Returns the Body of a Hostage, One of the Last in Gaza

Israel confirmed the remains belonged to Dror Or, 48, who was abducted during Hamas’s Oct. 7 attacks. The bodies of two captives are believed to be still in Gaza.

Hamas handed over the body of an Israeli hostage on Tuesday that it said it had found in central Gaza, bringing the militant group and Israel a step closer to resolving a major flashpoint of the cease-fire in the Palestinian enclave.

After forensic testing, the Israeli government identified the body as Dror Or, 48, one of around 250 people who were seized by Hamas and its allies during their Oct. 7, 2023, attack that ignited the war in Gaza. Red Cross mediators transferred the remains from Hamas to Israel.

Mr. Or was a resident of Be’eri, an Israeli kibbutz that was devastated by the Hamas assault. His wife Yonat was killed and two of his children, Alma and Noam, were also taken to Gaza as hostages; they were brought home alive in a subsequent cease-fire.

The bodies of one Israeli and one Thai national are still in Gaza: Ran Gvili, 24; and Sudthisak Rinthalak, 43.

Israel and Hamas agreed to a U.S.-backed cease-fire in mid-October, ending more than two years of war in Gaza. As part of the truce, Hamas released the remaining 20 surviving Israeli hostages still held in the enclave in exchange for nearly 2,000 Palestinian prisoners and detainees.

Hamas also agreed to turn over the bodies of 28 other Israelis and foreign nationals that were still in Gaza. Though Palestinian militants released the living hostages soon after the cease-fire, the remains have been handed over in batches over several weeks.

Israeli leaders, including Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, have accused Hamas of dragging its feet and not following through on its side of the deal. Israeli officials say Hamas could hand over more remains but wanted to hold on to the bodies as leverage.

Hamas officials have blamed the widespread devastation in the enclave for the delay, saying that some hostages were believed to be buried under rubble after two years of Israeli bombardment. They also say they have struggled to pinpoint the locations of other bodies because the fighters who had buried them earlier in the war had since been killed.

The issue ignited tensions that have rattled the fragile truce, as each side has accused the other of violating the terms of the agreement. Gunmen in Gaza have also shot at Israeli forces, according to the Israeli military, prompting Israeli strikes across the enclave.

More than 300 Palestinians have been killed in Israeli attacks since the cease-fire was signed, according to the Gaza health ministry, which does not say how many were combatants.

The war began when Hamas and its allies killed about 1,200 people, mostly civilians, and seized 250 as hostages, according to the Israeli authorities. The subsequent Israeli campaign against Hamas killed more than 65,000 people in Gaza, including thousands of children, according to Gazan health officials.

While the cease-fire paused the Israeli offensive, analysts say it is far from clear how long it will last. The Trump administration has drawn up an ambitious plan for Gaza that involves disarming Hamas and deploying an international force, both of which are proving to be significant challenges.

