=== METADATA ===
Source: New York Times
Title: Israel Says a Gaza Border Will Reopen, but Only for Palestinians to Leave
Authors: Aaron Boxerman
Reported_From: Jerusalem
Published_Date: 2025-12-03
Print_Version_Date: 2025-12-04
Section: A
Page: 9
Conflict: Israel-Hamas War

=== IMAGES ===

[IMAGE_1]
Caption: The Rafah crossing at the border between southern Gaza and Egypt in 2023. Israel has said it will reopen “in the coming days,” but Egypt denies this.
Credit: Samar Abu Elouf / The New York Times
Position: Au début de l’article, après l’introduction sur le Rafah crossing et l’ouverture limitée pour les Palestiniens.

=== ARTICLE ===
Israel Says a Gaza Border Will Reopen, but Only for Palestinians to Leave
Israel had agreed to open the Rafah crossing as part of the October cease-fire deal with Hamas but kept it closed.

Israel said on Wednesday that it would begin allowing some Palestinians to leave the Gaza Strip for Egypt “in the coming days” through the Rafah border crossing.

Such an opening would be a lifeline for Gazans hoping to flee the devastated enclave, particularly the sick and wounded.

Israel’s military liaison on humanitarian affairs, widely known by its acronym, COGAT, said that the crossing would open only one way, allowing Palestinians to leave Gaza but not to return, and that it would be overseen in part by the European Union, working with Egypt and Israel.

But the Egyptian government on Wednesday denied that it was coordinating with Israel to reopen the Rafah crossing.

Egypt’s state information service said that, according to the cease-fire agreed upon between Israel and Hamas in October, the border had to be open in both directions. In addition to allowing Palestinians to leave Gaza for Egypt, that would most likely mean that the tens of thousands of Gazans displaced to Egypt could also begin returning home.

Israel and Hamas agreed on those broad terms for reopening the border in mid-October, when they signed a cease-fire that ended the two-year war in Gaza. But Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel later said the Rafah crossing would remain closed until further notice.

Shosh Bedrosian, an Israeli government spokeswoman, told reporters on Wednesday that Rafah would be opened both ways when the bodies of the remaining captives in Gaza were returned to Israel.

The remains of two captives are believed to still be in Gaza, and on Wednesday, Hamas handed over a body to Israel for identification.

Much about how the Rafah crossing will operate remains unclear, such as exactly when it will reopen and how many Palestinians will be allowed to leave.

The Rafah crossing was the main route out of Gaza for Palestinians who were able to escape during the first several months of the war. It was a gateway for many seeking medical treatment abroad, although Israel has also permitted some to leave through its territory.

Israeli forces invaded Rafah in May 2024 and seized the crossing. Israel and Egypt could not agree on how to reopen the border, which trapped some sick and wounded Palestinians without access to proper medical treatment.

At least 16,500 sick and injured Palestinians still need treatment unavailable in the devastated enclave, the World Health Organization said this week.

The Rafah crossing briefly reopened in February during a cease-fire that collapsed in mid-March. At the time, the E.U. border monitors, as well as officers from the internationally backed Palestinian Authority, helped oversee operations at the crossing.

Throughout the war, most Gazans have been unable to flee the Israeli military campaign for neighboring countries. Those who managed to leave often had to secure approval from Israeli and Egyptian security services.

More than 250 Israelis and foreign nationals were taken hostage during the Hamas-led attack on Oct. 7, 2023, that ignited the war in Gaza. Two brief cease-fires freed more than 130 survivors, while Israeli forces rescued several others and recovered the bodies of still more.

In October, Hamas freed the final surviving 20 hostages and committed to handing over the remains of those who had been killed. Yet that process has taken time: Hamas says some were lost under rubble, while Israeli officials have accused Hamas of dragging its feet.

Two bodies — those of an Israeli and a Thai — are believed to still be somewhere in Gaza. Hamas officials, accompanied by the International Committee for the Red Cross, have been excavating parts of Gaza to find them.

If a body is found, the Israeli authorities will conduct forensic testing to establish whether it belongs to one of the final two people believed to have been taken captive. On Tuesday, Hamas handed over remains that Israeli officials later said did not belong to a hostage.

A correction was made on Dec. 3, 2025: An earlier version of this article misstated the Israeli conditions for fully reopening the Rafah crossing. An Israeli government spokeswoman said that it would be opened in both directions when the bodies of the last captives believed to be held in Gaza are returned to Israel.

When we learn of a mistake, we acknowledge it with a correction. If you spot an error, please let us know at nytnews@nytimes.com.

Aaron Boxerman is a Times reporter covering Israel and Gaza. He is based in Jerusalem.

A version of this article appears in print on Dec. 4, 2025, Section A, Page 9 of the New York edition with the headline: Israel Says a Gaza Border Will Reopen, but Only as an Exit. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe
