=== METADATA ===
Source: New York Times
Section: Israel-Hamas War
Title: Freed From Hamas, but Not Captivity
Authors: Isabel Kershner, Avishag Shaar-Yashuv
Visuals: Avishag Shaar-Yashuv
Reported from: Jerusalem
Published_Date: Oct. 6, 2025
Language: English

=== ARTICLE ===

After nearly 500 days of captivity in Gaza, Emily Damari was released by Hamas militants in a trade with Israel.

The worst lay behind her, but the ordeal was not over.

Weeks after regaining her freedom, Ms. Damari returned to the home where she had lost it on a day of stunning brutality: Oct. 7, 2023.

Now she has a new home, where friends gathered for a housewarming. But the memories of those still held hostage are never far away.

On the morning that Hamas gunmen overran Kfar Aza, a pastoral Israeli kibbutz near the border with Gaza, they burst into Emily Damari’s small apartment, shot and killed her dog, Choocha, and snatched her from her bedroom. She was bleeding from hand and leg wounds.

Then they took the keys to her car and drove her and two neighbors across the fields back into their Palestinian coastal enclave. For the next 471 days, Ms. Damari was held hostage, above and below ground.

Released on Jan. 19, 2025, as part of a brief cease-fire, she emerged ebullient, arriving at a hospital near Tel Aviv wrapped in a large Israeli flag.

When she was reunited with her mother, she flashed a kind of V-sign with her bandaged left hand — a “rock on” gesture made up of her thumb and her index and little fingers because her two middle fingers were missing. That gesture, captured in photos released by the Israeli military, instantly became iconic, a symbol of resilience and survival.

The next morning, she thanked her family, friends and God in an Instagram post and declared, “I have returned to life.”

Ms. Damari still faced months of arduous rehabilitation in the hospital and at a halfway hotel where she stayed with other former hostages, as well as surgery for the wounds she sustained when she was abducted.

Ms. Damari celebrated her 29th birthday in June in a new home near the Mediterranean Sea, about 50 miles up the coast from Gaza.

It is a different life from what she calls the “simple, ordinary, banal” existence she once knew in Kfar Aza. That one ended abruptly two years ago, with the Hamas assault that ignited the war in Gaza.

As she adjusts to her new circumstances, reminders of her captivity are omnipresent, and especially poignant at a time when negotiators are discussing another cease-fire, like the one under which she and other Israeli hostages were freed in exchange for Palestinian prisoners.

She has a new partner, Danielle Amit, a food blogger, and is full of gratitude.

“I remember where I was a year ago,” she said in an interview with The New York Times.

In Gaza, Ms. Damari’s captors moved her about 30 times as Israeli bombs exploded above and around her, she said. She spent one night in a cramped tire storage area breathing in rubber fumes. And she spent months in the tunnels, sometimes crammed with other female hostages in what she described as a small “cage.”

Ms. Damari studied those who held her and quickly learned who was against whom, and whom she could ask for what.

“I was not going to be a victim,” she said.

When she was taken for treatment soon after her abduction to a hospital she identified as Shifa, Gaza’s largest medical center, a man introduced himself as “Dr. Hamas,” she said, before anesthetizing her and amputating her damaged fingers. “He was surrounded by 15 armed terrorists,” she recalled.

At the hospital, Ms. Damari met Romi Gonen, a hostage seized at the Nova music festival. In the haze and trauma of the moment, they could not talk much, but 40 days later, they met again, in the tunnels. Ms. Gonen was in the cage.

“She looks at me and says, ‘Hey, Two Fingers!’” Ms. Damari recalled.

The two women remained together for the rest of their captivity, much of the time on their own. Even sisters do not spend 24 hours a day together, Ms. Damari said.

“She was injured in the left leg and right arm, and me in the right leg and left hand,” she said, describing their friendship as “something cosmic.”

After both women were freed in the last cease-fire, they remained together through the first months of rehabilitation. The surgery in Gaza had left Ms. Damari in constant, searing pain. When Israeli doctors at Sheba Medical Center, near Tel Aviv, performed corrective surgery, Ms. Gonen, who herself has gone through surgery twice since her release, was once more at her side.

She was with her again in early February 2025, when Ms. Damari went back home to see what was left.

The Kfar Aza that Ms. Damari once knew, a communal village where she was surrounded by family and friends, where she loved barbecues and karaoke parties, was desolate.

Now, she and Ms. Gonen toured a landscape of battered and abandoned structures.

Ms. Damari had lived in the so-called Young Generation neighborhood of Kfar Aza. The residents lived in close quarters, in rows of single-story compact homes. They would often gather outside for a beer or just to enjoy the night air.

The neighborhood, on the edge of the kibbutz, was ravaged as gunmen went from house to house. In all, more than 60 people in the kibbutz were killed out of a population of about 1,000, and some 19 others abducted.

Ms. Damari was particularly close to two of her neighbors, twins named Gali and Ziv Berman. When she was afraid of being alone during the attack, Gali Berman dashed over to be with her.

All three were taken to Gaza together in Ms. Damari’s car.

When Hamas let Ms. Damari go, they gave her a “certificate of release.” She keeps it in a drawer.

In captivity, Ms. Damari was deprived of joining in the communal mourning taking place back home for those killed in the attack. Since her return, she has visited the graves of friends and neighbors.

She was also deprived of the everyday things often taken for granted: a ray of sunshine, the moon and the stars; being able to take a walk; a cold glass of water.

“There were days I would beg them for a cold glass of water,” she said.

In Gaza, Ms. Damari learned how to survive. Now she is learning how to be alive again.

She got a new tattoo in Tel Aviv — and let Ms. Gonen look on in a video call.

She is building her strength back up, running on her own and working with a trainer.

A fan of the soccer team Maccabi Tel Aviv, she found the players were not the only ones being cheered when she arrived at a game.

Ms. Damari has celebrity status now, whether she wants it or not.

“It happened beyond my control,” she said. “If I can somehow give people inspiration and hope, for me that’s a privilege.”

At the Maccabi game, the first since her return home a month earlier, she led a roaring crowd in singing the team’s anthem. Sing loud enough to be heard in the tunnels, she urged.

In captivity, she imagined herself being freed one day and taking the public stage. “My dream when I was there was to fly all over the world and share my story in all sorts of places,” she said.

Now, when traveling for lectures and meetings, she cannot unburden herself of the suffering of hostages still in Gaza. “I feel guilty when I get on a plane, when I sit in a hotel,” she said. “Emily Damari is not free.”

Ms. Damari is determined that Israel not fail the hostages still in Gaza. She has added her voice to the calls for their freedom, and has met with others who, like her, have been released. When some gathered at her new home, they returned to a pastime that once helped make the hours of captivity in Gaza less unbearable: playing cards.

“To get excited at the age of 27 about a pack of cards is absurd,” Ms. Damari said. “But you have nothing in the world other than that pack. You held onto it with all your life.”

In Kfar Aza, Ms. Damari would often drink her morning coffee with the Berman twins,  but on their first day in Gaza, Gali Berman was taken away. Ziv Berman and Ms. Damari stayed together until Day 40, when they were taken down into the tunnels, but then he, too, was removed. Their captors said they had to separate the men from the women.

Of the roughly 250 hostages taken in the Hamas attack, dozens were released in exchange for Palestinian prisoners in Israel during two brief cease-fires, and a handful were rescued alive by Israeli troops.

Only about 20 of the remaining 48 people seized on Oct. 7 are believed to still be alive, according to the Israeli government, among them the twins. As long as they remain captive, Ms. Damari said, “there’s no way I can say I am free.”

In May, Ms. Damari made her first trip abroad since her release, to Britain, where her mother, Mandy, was born and had taken her campaign on behalf of the hostages. “I came for solutions, not sympathy,” Mandy Damari said at a news conference in London after meeting senior politicians in December.

Her own trip gave Emily Damari an opportunity to thank people who had worked for her freedom.

Naturally, she made time for a stop at her favorite British soccer club, Tottenham Hotspur, to watch a game. The fans greeted her with yellow balloons and chanted, “Emily Damari, she’s one of our own.”

In Britain, Ms. Damari visited her grandfather’s grave. He died while she was in Gaza.

Soccer fans in Britain proved just as excited to see her as those back home in Israel.

Preparing for her birthday celebration at home with Ms. Amit.

Celebrating her new home.

In Gaza, Ms. Damari kept her sexual orientation a secret from her captors. Homosexuality is not accepted by many members of the largely conservative society there.

She met Ms. Amit, her partner, while she was staying at the hotel with the other freed hostages; Ms. Amit invited them to come and sample her famous pasta dish. Ms. Damari moved into her new home in the spring. Family, friends and volunteers prepared the house for her.

She still speaks to Ms. Gonen daily, she said, and they meet at least once a week.

Her wish now is for her friends held in Gaza to come home, along with the rest of the other hostages. She is also thinking about her own plans. She intends to have children, she says, but she also wants to keep sharing her story — and the story of that October day in Israel — with as many people as she can.

“People have to understand what happened here,” she said. “I was one of 250, many of whom did not survive.”

