=== METADATA ===
Source: New York Times
Section: Israel-Hamas War
Title: The Changing Map of Palestinian Recognition
Authors: Ashley Wu
Visuals: The New York Times
Reported from: —
Published_Date: July 30, 2025
Updated_Date: Sept. 22, 2025
Language: English

=== ARTICLE ===
The Changing Map of Palestinian Recognition

France, Luxembourg, Malta and Andorra are the latest to recognize a Palestinian state.

France announced its recognition of the state of Palestine at the United Nations General Assembly on Monday. Hours later, Luxembourg, Malta and Andorra followed. Australia, Britain, Canada and Portugal had confirmed their recognition on Sunday.

Before the General Assembly, most countries in the U.N. had already recognized a Palestinian state. Palestine is currently a nonmember observer state in the organization.

Belgium had also announced its intent to recognize Palestinian statehood. On Monday, its prime minister said his country was joining the movement, but that it would not “legally recognize” the state until Hamas released the Israeli hostages and is removed from Palestine.

The announcements were made in an effort to help salvage the prospect of a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. They also reflect the deep frustrations with Israel’s conduct of the war in Gaza, which has killed tens of thousands of Palestinians and left a population of about two million in a state of extreme privation and hunger.

There are five permanent members of the U.N. Security Council: Britain, China, France, Russia and the United States. The moves by France and Britain leave the United States as the only permanent member that does not recognize a Palestinian state.

Last year, the United States blocked the Security Council from moving forward on a Palestinian bid to be recognized as a full member state at the United Nations. The vote was 12 in favor of the resolution and one — the United States — opposed, with abstentions from Britain and Switzerland.



