=== METADATA ===
Source: The New York Times
Section: International / Politics
Title: Netanyahu Says He Is Undaunted by Legal Woes at Home and Threats of Arrest by New York’s Mayor-Elect
Authors: Ephrat Livni
Published: Dec. 3, 2025

=== ARTICLE ===

Netanyahu Says He Is Undaunted by Legal Woes at Home and Threats of Arrest by New York’s Mayor-Elect

Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, said on Wednesday that he would not hesitate to visit New York, despite a pledge by the city’s mayor-elect, Zohran Mamdani, to honor an arrest warrant issued by the International Criminal Court on charges of war crimes.

Speaking at the DealBook Summit on Wednesday via video from Israel, Mr. Netanyahu reiterated his rejection of the accusations in connection with Israel’s war in Gaza. Mr. Mamdani has been critical of Israel.

“I’ll come to New York,” Mr. Netanyahu said, adding, “Yes, of course I will.”

But the I.C.C. warrant is not the only legal challenge for Mr. Netanyahu, nor is it the most consuming. He has, for many years, faced accusations of corruption in Israel, and a trial on those charges is now underway.

Mr. Netanyahu, who said he had attended the trial earlier in the day, has dismissed these accusations as a distraction concocted by political enemies. “I’m supposed to spend three times a week, eight hours a week in that trial,” he said. “And, you know, I’ve got a few other things to do. And I think history beckons.”

This week, Mr. Netanyahu asked Israel’s president, Isaac Herzog — whose role is mostly ceremonial — to “end” his trial. The prime minister was following the lead of President Trump, who has on multiple occasions suggested that Mr. Herzog should preemptively “pardon” Mr. Netanyahu.

Mr. Trump has framed the trial as political persecution, likening it to cases he says he has faced in the United States. But in his letter to Israel’s president this week, Mr. Netanyahu has avoided using quite the same words as Mr. Trump. He has not asked for a “pardon” or anything that would suggest he has done something that must be forgiven. “They don’t want justice,” he said of his accusers. “They want me out of office.”

While Mr. Netanyahu has spoken to Mr. Trump about Mr. Netanyahu’s request to Mr. Herzog, he declined to share details of that conversation or to speculate on whether Israel’s president would grant his wish. “President Trump spoke time and time again about the need to end this, what he calls a ‘witch hunt,’” Mr. Netanyahu said.

Mr. Netanyahu’s lawyers, in their brief backing his request this week, adopted tactics from the Trump team’s legal strategy, including demonizing the law enforcement system, portraying Mr. Netanyahu as a victim and seeming to hint at potential retribution. They argued that for the good of Israel, its leader should be freed from wasting valuable time defending himself in court, a position Mr. Netanyahu reiterated on Wednesday.

Mr. Netanyahu had rejected calls when he was indicted in 2019 that he step down to face trial rather than be distracted from running the country. Now, he says that there is too much at stake in Israel and the region, after more than two years of war and amid a fragile cease-fire in Gaza, to continue with the legal proceedings.

“It’s a joke,” Mr. Netanyahu said of the trial. As he has before, Mr. Netanyahu said on Wednesday that now is not the moment for him to lose focus or to step aside, though some Israeli opposition leaders have said that a pardon might be appropriate if he pledges to exit politics.

Asked whether, at 76, he was ready to step away, Mr. Netanyahu said he was not. “When history is within reach, you don’t step aside, you step forward, and that is what I am doing,” he said.

