=== METADATA ===
Source: New York Times
Section: Israel-Hamas War / U.S. Politics
Title: Trump Calls on Israel to Stop Bombing Gaza After Hamas Agrees to Parts of Cease-Fire Plan
Authors: Katie Rogers
Reported from: Washington
Published_Date: Oct. 3, 2025
Language: English

=== ARTICLE ===
Trump Calls on Israel to Stop Bombing Gaza After Hamas Agrees to Parts of Cease-Fire Plan

President Trump said he believed Hamas was “ready for a lasting peace” after the militant group offered to release hostages and discuss the U.S.-led peace proposal.

President Trump said on Friday evening that he believed Hamas was “ready for a lasting peace” in Gaza, and called on Israel to stop bombing the enclave so that Israeli hostages could be removed from it safely.

Earlier on Friday, the Palestinian group said in a statement that it had agreed to release all of the Israeli hostages held in Gaza as well as the bodies of those who had died there in the wake of its Oct. 7, 2023, attacks. But Hamas officials said they wanted to negotiate other elements of the plan proposed by Mr. Trump at the White House this week.

Mr. Trump, whose administration had aggressively pushed Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel to agree to the president’s 20-point peace accord, quickly posted a response on his social media page.

“Based on the Statement just issued by Hamas, I believe they are ready for a lasting PEACE,” Mr. Trump wrote. “Israel must immediately stop the bombing of Gaza, so that we can get the Hostages out safely and quickly! Right now, it’s far too dangerous to do that. We are already in discussions on details to be worked out. This is not about Gaza alone, this is about long sought PEACE in the Middle East.”

Israel did not immediately make any public statements. It was not entirely clear whether Hamas’s response will mean the plan moves forward. The statement, for example, did not address key elements of the American proposal that called on the group to give up its arms, which has been a major demand of Israel.

Earlier on Friday, Mr. Trump delivered a 300-word missive on social media relaying his frustration with Hamas officials, who had said they were considering the proposal but rejected its presentation as an ultimatum.

“Hamas is discussing this plan with seriousness,” Mohammad Nazzal, a senior Hamas official, told Al Jazeera in an interview on Thursday. He added that Hamas had “comments” on the 20-point plan and was looking for “gray areas” it could work with.

On social media, the president warned Hamas fighters that thousands of them had already been killed and that many more would be if they did not agree to a deal by 6 p.m. Sunday.

“Most of the rest are surrounded and MILITARILY TRAPPED, just waiting for me to give the word, ‘GO,’ for their lives to be quickly extinguished,” he wrote.

“I am asking that all innocent Palestinians immediately leave this area of potentially great future death for safer parts of Gaza,” Mr. Trump added. “Everyone will be well cared for by those that are waiting to help.”

For many people living in Gaza, uprooting would be difficult or impossible. Hundreds of thousands live near Gaza City, the site of the latest Israeli ground invasion, and are unable or unwilling to flee to overcrowded areas with scarce resources.

The 20-point proposal calls for Hamas to release all Israeli hostages and for the group to disarm. The plan also stipulates a phased withdrawal of Israeli forces from Gaza. After Mr. Trump unveiled the proposal at the White House, he told reporters in Washington that the moment was “potentially one of the great days ever in civilization.”

