Concordance pour 'ukraine'
Displaying 25 of 495 matches:
Times Title : How Russia ’ s war in Ukraine has unfolded , month by month Autho
= ARTICLE === How Russia ’ s war in Ukraine has unfolded , month by month . A t
f Russia ’ s full-scale invasion of Ukraine , which began one year ago . Russia
 began their full-scale invasion of Ukraine on Feb. 24 , 2022 . Since then , We
regional capital , aiming to secure Ukraine ’ s coast . Moscow also sought to f
la , which it illegally seized from Ukraine in 2014 , and Russian-backed breaka
republics that emerged that year in Ukraine ’ s eastern Donetsk and Luhansk reg
. Far more civilians were killed in Ukraine in March than in any other month of
 Snake Island in the Black Sea , as Ukraine reclaimed a sliver of land off Odes
 ’ s Black Sea fleet , the Moskva , Ukraine further undermined Moscow ’ s aura 
r weeks of bloody fighting . August Ukraine launched a counteroffensive in the 
 . September In a rapid offensive , Ukraine retook much of the northeastern Kha
 seized the initiative in the war . Ukraine would recapture the eastern city of
hed a barrage of airstrikes against Ukraine , the start of a campaign against t
o River , a significant victory for Ukraine . December With little territory ch
changing hands on the battlefield , Ukraine carried out drone attacks on milita
aths of 89 soldiers in the attack ; Ukraine said hundreds had been killed or wo
ying a renewed offensive in eastern Ukraine , edged closer to seizing the city 
oaching 200,000 killed or wounded . Ukraine had 100,000 killed or wounded in ac
imes Title : As Trump Pushes to End Ukraine War , Europe Toils to Have a Say Au
 ARTICLE === As Trump Pushes to End Ukraine War , Europe Toils to Have a Say In
 . Would the Americans really force Ukraine to capitulate , embrace President V
s of Ukrainian territory , a ban on Ukraine ’ s membership in NATO , a limit on
ip in NATO , a limit on the size of Ukraine ’ s military and a refusal to allow
ow European troops on the ground in Ukraine . In a radio interview on Tuesday ,

Mots similaires à 'ukraine' ===
russia trump kyiv europe moscow it the france putin geneva he there
that donetsk venezuela she witkoff how in russian
