concordance pour 'hamas' : 
Displaying 25 of 376 matches:
e as he described the battle against Hamas as “ catching a mouse. ” In Amman , 
ke on Gaza on Wednesday after saying Hamas had attacked its soldiers , the late
southern Gaza , in retaliation for a Hamas attack in nearby Rafah that it said 
li military has said it has targeted Hamas , but Palestinian health officials h
ted the war in Gaza . On Wednesday , Hamas and Islamic Jihad , the second-large
 long-term cease-fire . In Rafah , a Hamas militant opened fire on an Israeli a
e as he described the battle against Hamas as “ catching a mouse. ” In Amman , 
ese were the signs of battle between Hamas , the Palestinian militia that contr
ich had for eight days tried to oust Hamas from power . Israeli military leader
invasive force that aims to vanquish Hamas , which led a brazen raid on Israel 
eaching the outskirts of Gaza City , Hamas ’ s stronghold , and establishing co
h authority , which is controlled by Hamas . Palestinian residents had fled sou
ected an image of quiet confidence . Hamas had been routed here , the colonel s
. At any moment , the colonel said , Hamas fighters might emerge from hidden sh
 Protect Journalists . To truly rout Hamas , Israel will need to capture all of
it the Israelis in Gaza City , where Hamas fighters are entrenched in their sub
 avoid . “ We do our best to destroy Hamas only , without harming the civilians
 : New York Times Title : A Weakened Hamas Still Dominates Gaza , Building Day 
Hamas War === ARTICLE === A Weakened Hamas Still Dominates Gaza , Building Day 
years of war with Israel has allowed Hamas to tighten its grip on power again .
tober under a cease-fire agreement , Hamas has moved quickly to fill the void .
essmen . Over two years of war , top Hamas commanders and thousands of fighters
th the rest occupied by Israel . Yet Hamas has managed to reassert its power in
 to discuss internal assessments . “ Hamas was hit hard , but it wasn ’ t defea
s plan to reconstruct a Gaza free of Hamas . The plan envisions the enclave ’ s
similarite pour 'hamas' : 
israel it he gaza palestinians netanyahu israeli trump hezbollah there
egypt the him one and military people october palestinian civilians
